CS 0401 Intermediate Programming Using Java

Computers are ubiquitous tools that have and will continue to shape our world. In common usage for only half of a century, in their short existence they have already revolutionized science, art, business, and entertainment. 
However, at their core, computers are simple machines that can only do basic mathematical computations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, etc.) and make decisions based upon fundamental rules of logic. 
How then, can such basic operations be utilized to make something so powerful?

The act of programming a computer requires us to translate a problem we wish to solve, be it a math problem, a business problem, or even a video game, into a representation that the computer 
and its simple operations can manipulate. This requires at least two steps:

First, we must model the problem as information we call data. Data can be anything from the values of a science experiment to a collection of the very letters that comprise the sentence you are reading.  
For real, life-sized problems, we will build as complex of a model as is necessary up from smaller components, starting with those fundamental to a computer, and turning them into larger units that we will call objects.

Second, we must encode the interaction and manipulation of those objects as code: The collection of computer operations that transforms data using well-defined rules.
In this class, we will choose to describe our computer programs in a programming language called Java. Java is a programming language built around the creation and management of objects 
in terms of the data they contain and the code that acts upon them. There are many Object-Oriented Programming Languages, but Java is a good choice for both learning and real-life use. 
The skills that we learn in Java will be easily transferrable to other programming languages and even other programming paradigms.

At the end of this course, students will be able to:
         Write programs in the Java programming language that utilize objects from the Java class library as well as custom-objects that model the problem being solved.
         Understand and utilize the tools necessary to create and run a Java program, understand the output when errors occur, and to solve errors at compile time and run time using the skill of debugging.
         Use and apply simple data structures such as arrays and similar collections to hold aggregate data.
         Develop and appreciate basic algorithms such as searching and sorting.
         Have the foundation necessary to proceed to further courses in the computer science/engineering and information science fields.